We sampled select pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCP) compounds (acetaminophen, caffeine, and triclosan) before, during, and after the swimming event across three years. On each sampling day, we collected 1 L of surface water at six sampling sites (described in the csv ‘reservoir_site_descriptions.csv’) in Carvins Cove Reservoir at a standard depth of 0.5 m with a Van Dorn sampler. Samples were collected in critically-cleaned (a procedure to remove organic compounds with sodium hydroxide), amber glass bottles and were stored on ice after collection.

Before solid-phase extraction (SPE), water samples were first filtered through 0.7-μm GF/F filters (Whatman) filters, then pH adjusted to 4.0 with a 10% H2SO4 or 10% HCl solution before adding 0.2 g of Na-EDTA (chelating agent). The processed samples were stored in a 4°C refrigerator until extraction, which was completed typically within 24 hours of collection (Gray et al., 2020). A Promochrom SPE-03 automated SPE system was utilized for sample extraction with Oasis HLB 3cc (60mg) cartridges (Waters Corporation, Andover, MA, USA); all extraction chemicals were Optima grade and purchased from Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). The SPE extract was then evaporated to dryness under a gentle stream of nitrogen gas and reconstituted with a 50:50 methanol:water solution containing 0.1% formic acid (FA), then transferred into 2-mL amber autosampler vials.  

Mass spectrometry analysis of the target analytes (caffeine, acetaminophen, and triclosan) was conducted using two different analytical instruments. For years 2021 and 2022, we used a TSQ Quantum Access triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Acquity Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation). Our analysis used an Acquity HSS T3 column (50 mm × 2.1 mm, i.d. 1.8 mm) and a binary solvent gradient consisting of Optima grade water containing 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase A) and Optima grade methanol containing 0.1% FA (mobile phase B). For year 3, we used a Shimadzu (Columbia, MD, USA) liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). This analysis utilized an Acquity HSS T3 column (50 mm × 2.1 mm, i.d. 1.8 mm) and a binary solvent gradient of Optima grade water containing 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase A) and Optima grade acetonitrile (mobile phase B). 

To assess the quantification, linearity, and precision of our methods, we used reference standards of each analyte purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (99% purity; Allentown, Pennsylvania,USA). Standards of each analyte were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or methanol; calibration curves were prepared within 24 hours of analysis (Gray et al., 2020). 13C-labeled caffeine was purchased from Cambridge Laboratories (Tewksbury, Massachusetts, USA) to serve as our internal standard. The analytes were analyzed using electrospray ionization in both positive and negative modes. The method was validated through the estimation of the linearity range using external calibration curves (R2 ≥ 0.99), method detection, and quantification limits. 

To evaluate changes in concentrations, we set concentrations that exceeded the upper limit of quantification (ULOQ) to the value of the ULOQ for that year's samples (data flagged with a value of 2, see data entities table), and values less than the lower limits of detection (LLOD) were set to half the LLOD for that year (data flagged with a value of 1, see data entities table).

We have included an R markdown script (CCR_Swimming_analysis.Rmd) that was used to visualize data and conduct summary statistics for publication.




References


Gray, A.D., D. Todd, A. E. Hershey. 2020. The seasonal distribution and concentration of antibiotics in rural streams and drinking wells in the piedmont of North Carolina. Science of the Total Environment. 710. 136286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.136286
